---
meta:
  - title: Optimize with memoization in React
    content:
      In this article, I will show you how to optimize your React components
      with memoization. This will help you to avoid unnecessary re-renders and
      improve the performance of your application.
    image: 'img/usememo.jpg'
    date: 20th February 2024
    dateTime: 2024-02-20

headers:
  Cache-Control: no-cache
---

![Main image](/img/usememo.jpg)

# **Performance Optimization with Memoization in React**

The use of memoization can significantly contribute to enhancing the performance
of your React application. However, there are some important aspects you should
consider before hastily wrapping all your React components with **`memo`**. In
this post, I'll explain what **Memoization** exactly is and under what
circumstances its use is sensible.

## **What exactly is Memoization in React?**

**Memoization** prevents your component from re-rendering as long as the passed
props do not change. It's particularly important to understand that the props
comparison is only shallow. This means that for simple data types like strings
and numbers, the values are directly compared, while for objects, only the
references are checked. For this reason, it's crucial to generate a new
reference when making changes in objects, rather than mutating the existing
object. Otherwise, it could happen that your component does not re-render as
expected, even if a value within the object changes. For further information, I
recommend the [official documentation](https://react.dev/reference/react/memo)
on React Memo.

## **Why should I use Memoization?**

The use of **Memoization** is particularly advisable for computation-heavy
components, as it helps avoid unnecessary re-renders, thus improving the overall
performance of your application. The key to effectively using **Memoization**
lies in understanding when it is appropriate to use it, and when not. Targeted
application can significantly contribute to efficiency enhancement, while
excessive or improper use can potentially worsen performance.

## **When does it not make sense to use Memoization?**

A typical example of a potentially disadvantageous use of React Memo is using it
with a component that receives very dynamic data as props – meaning the data
changes almost with every render. Imagine a component that displays a time that
updates every second. Using **Memoization** in this case would hardly offer any
benefit, as the comparison operations to determine whether the component should
re-render have to occur every second. Since the props (in this case, the time)
are constantly changing, applying React Memo results in additional computational
work without a significant reduction in renderings. This can burden the
performance rather than improve it, as the costs for comparing the props
outweigh the savings from avoided re-renderings.

## **When should I use Memoization?**

**Memoization** proves particularly useful for components that are frequently
re-rendered but receive the same props in most cases. This often applies to
components that are stable in their presentation but could still be re-rendered
due to updates from parent components. Another ideal use case for
**Memoization** is components that process a large amount of data, such as a
product list with hundreds of entries. In such scenarios, **Memoization** can
help significantly improve render performance by preventing the component from
unnecessarily re-rendering if the data has not actually changed.

## **How do I use Memoization in React?**

React offers two different ways to utilize memoization: by using the
**`useMemo`** hook within a functional component and by wrapping a component
with the **`React.memo`** Higher-Order Component (HOC). Both methods serve to
optimize performance, yet they differ in their application and effect.

### **Using the `useMemo` Hook**

**`useMemo`** allows storing the result of a computation-intensive function
between the renderings of a component, provided the dependencies do not change.
This is useful to avoid unnecessary calculations on each render.

```jsx
import React, { useMemo } from 'react'

function Component({ value }) {
	const calculatedValue = useMemo(() => {
		// Computation-heavy logic here
		return value * 2
	}, [value])

	return <div>{calculatedValue}</div>
}
```

In this example, **`calculatedValue`** is recalculated only if **`value`**
changes, preventing unnecessary calculations.

### **Wrapping a Component with `React.memo`**

**`React.memo`** is a Higher-Order Component that prevents a component from
unnecessarily re-rendering if its props have not changed. It is particularly
useful for components that are frequently rendered with the same props.

```jsx
import React from 'react'

const MyComponent = React.memo(function MyComponent(props) {
	// Component logic
	return <div>{/* Render logic */}</div>
})
```

In this case, **`MyComponent`** will only re-render if the props change.

### **The Difference**

The main difference between **`useMemo`** and **`React.memo`** lies in their
scope and purpose:

- **`useMemo`** is used within a component to cache the result of a computation,
  affecting how values within a component are handled.
- **`React.memo`** is used to wrap a component itself and optimizes the
  rendering of the component based on changes to its props.

Both approaches contribute to performance optimization by preventing unnecessary
calculations or re-renderings. The choice between **`useMemo`** and
**`React.memo`** depends on the specific requirements of your component or
application.

## **What Should I Pay Attention To?**

When using **`useMemo`** and other memoization techniques, it's important to
find a balanced measure. Not every situation requires the use of memoization to
avoid re-rendering. Excessive use can lead to unnecessary complexity and even
worsen performance instead of improving it. Here are some key considerations:

- **Avoid excessive optimization**: Start developing your components without
  premature optimization. Use memoization techniques like **`useMemo`** and
  **`React.memo`** only when performance bottlenecks have been identified
  through profiling.
- **State Lifting**: Sometimes, lifting the state – moving the state up in the
  component hierarchy – can be a more effective way to manage unnecessary
  renders, especially in complex component structures.
- **Profiling and measurement**: Use React's development tools to profile your
  application and identify components that could benefit from memoization.
  Measurement should guide your decisions on where to apply optimizations.

## **Conclusion**

**Memoization** is a powerful technique for improving the performance of your
React application by preventing unnecessary re-renderings. However, its
effectiveness greatly depends on the context of its use. It's crucial to
understand when memoization is beneficial and when it might be
counterproductive. By thoughtfully applying **`useMemo`** and **`React.memo`**
where they are most effective, you can significantly enhance your application's
performance without falling into the trap of over-optimization. Always remember
to measure and profile your application to make informed decisions about where
these optimizations are truly necessary.
